.\" xymon-ext-dnssec(1) manual page
.TH XYMON-EXT-DNSSEC 1 "May 2026" "xymon-ext-dnssec" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
xymon-ext-dnssec \- Xymon DNSSEC monitoring probe
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B xymon-ext-dnssec
[\fB\-\-config\fR \fIFILE\fR]
[\fB\-\-hosts\-cfg\fR \fIFILE\fR]
[\fB\-\-zone\fR \fIZONE\fR]...
[\fB\-\-debug\fR]
[\fB\-\-debug\-dns\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B xymon-ext-dnssec
is a Xymon external probe that checks the DNSSEC health of one or more DNS
zones and reports the result to the Xymon monitoring server.
.PP
For each zone, the probe:
.IP \(bu 4
Queries the parent zone to retrieve the DS delegation and NS list.
.IP \(bu 4
For each authoritative name server: verifies the DNSKEY\(->DS chain,
RRSIG validity and expiry on DNSKEY, SOA, NS, CDS, CDNSKEY and NSEC3PARAM
RRsets, checks NSEC3PARAM RFC\~9276 compliance, verifies that CDS/CDNSKEY
matches the published DS records, and checks glue coherence.
.PP
Zones to monitor are read from the Xymon
.I hosts.cfg
file (via
.BR xymongrep (1))
and/or from the
.B \-\-zone
command-line option.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-\-zone\fR \fIZONE\fR
Add
.I ZONE
to the list of zones to check.
May be specified multiple times.
Zones specified on the command line are merged with those found in
.IR hosts.cfg .
.TP
\fB\-\-config\fR \fIFILE\fR
Path to the YAML configuration file.
Default: \fI/etc/xymon/xymon-ext-dnssec.yaml\fR
.TP
\fB\-\-hosts\-cfg\fR \fIFILE\fR
Path to the Xymon
.I hosts.cfg
file.
Overrides both the
.B hosts_cfg
configuration key and the
.B HOSTSCFG
environment variable.
.TP
\fB\-\-debug\fR
Enable verbose output: print all intermediate check results, not only
failures.
Use
.B \-\-no\-debug
to explicitly disable (default).
.TP
\fB\-\-debug\-dns\fR
Enable
.BR Net::DNS (3pm)
wire-level debug output.
Use
.B \-\-no\-debug\-dns
to explicitly disable (default).
.SH CONFIGURATION FILE
The probe reads a YAML configuration file (default:
.IR /etc/xymon/xymon-ext-dnssec.yaml ).
All keys are optional; built-in defaults apply when a key is absent.
.SS Global settings
.TP
\fBtest_name\fR \fISTRING\fR
Name of the Xymon test column.
Default: \fBdnssec\fR
.TP
\fBhosts_cfg\fR \fIPATH\fR
Path to the Xymon
.I hosts.cfg
file.
Overridden by the
.B HOSTSCFG
environment variable or the
.B \-\-hosts\-cfg
CLI option.
Default: (empty \(em relies on the environment variable set by Xymon)
.TP
\fBresolver_timeout\fR \fISECONDS\fR
UDP/TCP timeout for DNS queries (integer).
Default: \fB5\fR
.TP
\fBnameservers\fR \fILIST\fR
List of recursive resolver IP addresses to use for DNSSEC-validating queries.
When empty, the system resolver is used.
Default: \fB[]\fR
.PP
.RS
.nf
nameservers:
  - 9.9.9.9
  - 149.112.112.112
.fi
.RE
.SS Algorithm policy
.TP
\fBallowed_algorithms\fR \fILIST\fR
List of DNSSEC algorithm names or numbers considered acceptable.
Algorithm names follow RFC\~8624 mnemonics (e.g.\&
.BR ECDSAP256SHA256 ).
Numeric identifiers are also accepted.
KSK, CDS, and CDNSKEY records using an algorithm absent from this list are
flagged as yellow.
.PP
.RS
Default:
.nf
allowed_algorithms:
  - RSASHA256
  - RSASHA512
  - ECDSAP256SHA256
  - ECDSAP384SHA384
  - ED25519
  - ED448
.fi
.RE
.SS Per-zone defaults
These keys set the default behaviour for all zones.
They can be overridden on a per-zone basis in
.I hosts.cfg
(see
.B HOSTS.CFG OPTIONS
below).
.TP
\fBzone_warn_if_no_nsec3\fR \fIBOOLEAN\fR
Emit a yellow status when a zone publishes no NSEC3PARAM record.
Default: \fBtrue\fR
.TP
\fBzone_require_permanent_cds_cdnskey\fR \fIBOOLEAN\fR
Emit a yellow status when a zone publishes neither CDS nor CDNSKEY.
Set to
.B false
for zones that only publish CDS/CDNSKEY during key rollovers.
Default: \fBtrue\fR
.TP
\fBzone_parent_strip_labels\fR \fIINTEGER\fR
Number of leftmost DNS labels to strip from the zone name to derive the
parent zone used for DS/NS delegation queries.
For a standard second-level zone such as
.I example.com
the default value of
.B 1
is correct (strips
.IR example ,
leaving
.IR com ).
For a zone hosted two levels below its Xymon-managed parent (e.g.\&
.IR foo.bar.example.com
where
.I example.com
is already monitored)
set this to
.B 2
to reach
.IR example.com
instead of
.IR bar.example.com .
Default: \fB1\fR
.SS Per-server options
.TP
\fBserver_options\fR \fIMAP\fR
A map of authoritative server hostnames (lowercase) to server-specific
settings.
The special key
.B default
applies to any server that has no explicit entry.
.PP
.RS
Supported sub-keys:
.TP
\fBtsig\fR
TSIG credentials used when querying that server.
.RS
.TP
\fBname\fR \fISTRING\fR
TSIG key name.
.TP
\fBsecret\fR \fISTRING\fR
Base64-encoded TSIG secret.
.TP
\fBalgorithm\fR \fISTRING\fR
TSIG algorithm.
Default: \fBhmac-sha256\fR
.RE
.PP
Example:
.nf
server_options:
  ns1.example.com:
    tsig:
      name: xymon-key
      algorithm: hmac-sha256
      secret: "base64secret=="
  default:
    tsig:
      name: default-key
      secret: "base64secret=="
.fi
.RE
.SS Full configuration example
.nf
test_name: dnssec
resolver_timeout: 5
nameservers:
  - 9.9.9.9

allowed_algorithms:
  - ECDSAP256SHA256
  - ECDSAP384SHA384
  - ED25519
  - ED448

zone_warn_if_no_nsec3: true
zone_require_permanent_cds_cdnskey: true
zone_parent_strip_labels: 1

server_options:
  ns1.internal.example.com:
    tsig:
      name: monitor-key
      algorithm: hmac-sha256
      secret: "c2VjcmV0"
.fi
.SH HOSTS.CFG OPTIONS
Zones are declared in the Xymon
.I hosts.cfg
file using the standard host entry syntax.
The probe is activated by adding the
.B dnssec
service tag to a host line.
The hostname is used as the zone name.
.PP
.RS
.nf
1.2.3.4  example.com  # dnssec
.fi
.RE
.PP
Per-zone options can be appended after
.BR dnssec= ,
as a comma-separated list of
.IB key : value
pairs:
.PP
.RS
.nf
1.2.3.4  example.com  # dnssec=permanent_cds_cdnskey:false,strip:2
.fi
.RE
.SS Available per-zone options
.TP
\fBpermanent_cds_cdnskey\fR:\fIBOOLEAN\fR
Override
.B zone_require_permanent_cds_cdnskey
for this zone.
Accepted boolean values:
.BR true / false ,
.BR yes / no ,
.BR 1 / 0 ,
.BR on / off .
Alias:
.BR require_permanent_cds_cdnskey .
.TP
\fBno_permanent_cds_cdnskey\fR
Shorthand to disable the CDS/CDNSKEY requirement for this zone.
Equivalent to
.BR permanent_cds_cdnskey:false .
.TP
\fBstrip\fR:\fIN\fR
Override
.B zone_parent_strip_labels
for this zone.
Alias:
.BR parent_strip_labels .
Useful for zones under multi-label public suffixes.
.TP
\fBnsec3\fR[:\fIBOOLEAN\fR]
Override
.B zone_warn_if_no_nsec3
for this zone.
.BR nsec3 " or " nsec3:true
activates the warning when no NSEC3PARAM record is found.
.B nsec3:false
disables it.
Accepted boolean values:
.BR true / false ,
.BR yes / no ,
.BR 1 / 0 ,
.BR on / off .
.TP
\fBnsec\fR[:\fIBOOLEAN\fR]
Declare that this zone intentionally uses NSEC (not NSEC3).
.BR nsec " or " nsec:true
suppresses the NSEC3PARAM warning.
.B nsec:false
is equivalent to
.BR nsec3:true .
.SS Example hosts.cfg entries
.PP
.RS
.nf
# Standard zone: parent is "org"
1.2.3.4  example.org            # dnssec

# Zone 2 levels below the managed parent: strip 2 to reach "example.com"
1.2.3.4  foo.bar.example.com    # dnssec=strip:2

# Zone that only uses CDS/CDNSKEY during rollovers
1.2.3.4  stable.org             # dnssec=no_permanent_cds_cdnskey

# Zone using NSEC instead of NSEC3
1.2.3.4  legacy.org             # dnssec=nsec
.fi
.RE
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Probe ran successfully (individual zone statuses are sent to Xymon regardless
of DNSSEC health).
.TP
.B non-zero
Fatal initialisation error (missing
.BR xymongrep (1),
invalid arguments, etc.).
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B HOSTSCFG
Path to the Xymon
.I hosts.cfg
file.
Set automatically by the Xymon server when the probe is run as a Xymon
external script.
.TP
.B XYMONHOME
If set, the probe looks for
.B xymongrep
under
.IR $XYMONHOME/bin/ .
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/xymon/xymon-ext-dnssec.yaml
Default configuration file.
.TP
.I /etc/xymon/hosts.cfg
Default Xymon hosts configuration file.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR xymon (1),
.BR xymongrep (1),
.BR dnssec-publish-ds (8),
.BR Net::DNS (3pm)
